https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XNZeV1sazKA

Transcript:
(00:00) All right. Time for another design review for this airplane cuz I'm moving on to another design, uh, a car, an off-road car. You'll see it soon. It's pretty dope. With, uh, working on it with Hamza. Shout out. But this thing, yeah, I found myself being obsessed with airplanes for the last couple of months.
(00:25) And, uh, I have my favorites. I have like, I have a spreadsheet that has I mean, it might it might as well be its own Wikipedia entry. It's like all the coolest airplanes and engines from like World War II on. That includes fighter jets and little propeller planes and bush planes and big crazy bombers and even helicopters and in that spreadsheet is a bunch of ideas that I have for interesting planes and this is one of them. This is an aerobatic turboprop.
(01:00) And as far as I've seen, nobody has hung a turboprop engine on the front of an aerobatic plane. Like a little one. There's There's like military trainers that have turboprops on them. Those are really cool. I'll show some pictures here of some of my favorite aerobatic military trainers with turboprops, but this is like a Red Bull Air Race form factor, you know, where it's like kind of small.
(01:35) In fact, the body was inspired by the Extra 330. And the canards, which we'll get into in detail, are inspired by Mike Patey. So, it's kind of all over the place in terms of inspiration. It's a familiar shape from the side and the top profile. However, there's some interesting features in here that I think you guys will get a kick out of.
(01:55) So, let's get into it. So, starting from the front, this is a contra-rotating propeller. And this assembly, I actually started with this first. And so, the idea behind a contra-rotating propeller assembly is you get two propellers rotating in the opposite direction. It's supposed to make it be more efficient.
(02:19) And the way that I achieved that was with this planetary gear set. And there's a ton of great videos out there on YouTube explaining exactly how all this works. I won't get into it in too much detail, but essentially, you got the center gear. You got these They're idler gears, but really they're planet gears.
(02:38) They rotate around. Then you get the ring gear on the outside. So, you know, red spins one way, blue spins the other way. And that's sort of how that works. And then for the engine, I decided to go with the Garrett TPE 331, which is a super cool engine. It It's not the most popular engine out there, but I find it to be the most interesting for a couple of reasons.
(03:03) First of all, it's made by Garrett. It was The design was later bought by Honeywell, who manufactures it now, but Garrett makes all of our favorite uh whistle snails. Everybody knows that. Them turboskis, you know what I'm saying? And so, the fact that Garrett made basically like a gigantic turbocharger and pumped fuel into it and made it into an airplane engine is super duper cool.
(03:28) The other thing is that it's incredibly light. Like this whole package is really, really small. Most other turboprops in this power range are twice as long as this, cuz they're you know, the most popular one is the Pratt & Whitney PT6. And that's a great engine. It's probably the best turboprop small turboprop engine. Um but but it's reverse flow, which has certain advantages. Um it's just longer.
(03:55) It's just a way longer engine. And these things are super cool. They're really light. They make up to 1,000 horsepower and they weigh just a couple hundred pounds. So, that's the engine that I decided to go with. And the thing that's the most interesting to me about this is it's it's straight flow.
(04:11) Like the intake's in the front and the exhaust in the back, which makes sense, but the PT6 is backwards. And the reason for that is the PT6 has exhaust out here by the tips so that it's cooled instantly. This has This kind of a challenge to package cuz you have to get the exhaust through the airplane, but I thought that was the coolest part cuz I made this really crazy exhaust nozzle here.
(04:37) Let me show you how this works. So, you're going from a round profile to a rectangular profile. And so, what I did to achieve this is I used a bunch of loft features. So, I have a circle here with a certain diameter. And then I calculate the area. And then I have an oval shaped here. It's really like a slot shape technically. And this has the same area.
(05:06) So, that the flow velocity is the same. There's no It looks like it's shrinking down a lot, but it's not. You can see how it widens out the further it goes down. And then the last output is this big wide slot that has a really short vertical profile. And this has the same area as the front.
(05:30) So, it's just a way to get the flow of the exhaust to be uninterrupted as it changes shape. And then I have this really wicked heat shield over here to protect the underbelly of the airplane. This would probably need an additional thermal layer or air gap as well so that it doesn't burn the carbon fiber, but that thing just looks super cool to my eye.
(05:51) So, that's the engine and exhaust. I guess now's a good time to talk about fuel as well before we move on. So, this was a This is a header tank. So, this is like the primary tank. And this holds 60 gallons, which you would burn through pretty fast, you know. It's I mean, these engines when they're really when they're real when you're really booking, they burn 60 gallons in an hour easily.
(06:18) Um but for an air show, that's plenty. You're not going to do an hour-long air show. It's probably like 20 minutes. Then you have these big giant ferry tanks. So, if you do need to make a cross-country flight or a ferry, uh there's an additional 200 gallons here in the in the wings. And then the cockpit, it's a two-seat configuration, and it's fly-by-wire because I wanted to use hydraulics to actuate everything, and I'll talk about the reason why I wanted to use hydraulics when we get to the canards.
(06:48) Um and two-seater fun to bring a friend when you're doing flips. So, let's talk about the wing assembly itself. So, this is kind of a crazy configuration. I haven't seen anything exactly like this. Extra The Extra 330 has a wing that's kind of like this in the sense that it's mostly made of carbon fiber, but this is a hybrid just cuz I don't really understand how to spec carbon fiber for strength requirements, but I do understand how to spec aluminum.
(07:22) So, what I did was I have these carbon fiber tubes that make up the wing spar. And so, you can see the tilt on the wing or the sweep on the wing, I should say. And these are just tubes with these little couplers here. And these couplers have slots, so they can lock into the fuselage and they're just clamped. They're clamped on.
(07:46) These parts look like this. So, they're super light. They're they're not putting any extra strain on the carbon because you have this internal ring as well as the external clamp. So, nothing should compress at all while it's being clamped. But, it's just at a slight angle and this would be really easy part to machine.
(08:05) And so, the spar is the most important part of the wing cuz it takes all the load bearing and it ties it to the ties the wing to the fuselage. And then same thing in the back just a smaller diameter and a more severe angle. And honestly, I I do recognize that having a swept wing is not the best aerodynamic shape.
(08:25) Uh but, it looks cool. That's really the only reason I did that and anyone who's a real aerospace engineer who knows about aerodynamics, feel free to school me in the comments about why swept wings on subsonic airplanes are a bad idea. I know they are. I don't really understand why, but I'd love to learn. So, let me know. Um and then just a regular I-beam spar here in the center.
(08:50) So, this is about as simple as it gets in terms of a shape. These These things are on every airplane. So, that's the main structure of the wing and then I have these ribs inside of the carbon skin. So, the the carbon skin would just wrap around it as like a final process. This wouldn't all be molded at once. Um but, the ribs would be machined.
(09:09) And rather than making individual parts, what I did was this is just a SolidWorks thing. You could break this up into separate bodies for manufacturing, but I just made one SolidWorks part file that holds all the ribs. And so, let's just roll all this back and I'll show you exactly how I did this. So, I started with this 3D sketch that captures the spar locations.
(09:34) And then I have the profile of the wing here. and this is a this is a NACA profile that I found online and so I just imported I imported an image and rescaled it to size and then traced out the profile of that wing using splines in SolidWorks. So this is an imperfect approximation of the true wing profile.
(10:05) The proper way to do this would be to program in all of the radiuses and curves and profiles and R squared values and all that all the stuff that makes up a curve but for the purposes of this is totally close enough. So then I just make a boss extrude then I make another plane and I do the exact same thing with the same image scaled down a little bit to match the taper on the wings.
(10:35) And I just keep repeating that process over and over and over and over again until I have all the all the rib all the stock for the rib then start cutting away for the spars. This is this would be a tricky feature to machine cuz this is not just a blind hole. This is at a slight angle so this would have to be either fixtured or put on a five axis to to cut out this hole at this angle.
(11:08) Then I add a bunch of lightweighting features on each one and then mirror it to the other side and that's the wing ribs and that's a really great skeleton for the rest of the wing assembly. So then for the wing skins the way that I did this was I just made planes that match each of the locations of the ribs and then I did a reference sketch of the rib and then an offset entity of 35 thousandths, which is a little bit less than a millimeter.
(11:41) Which is plenty of carbon. I think carbon sheets when they're cured are like 5,000 thick. So, this would be like six or seven ply. Which is probably overkill, but everything I do is overkill. That's for sure. And then the tanks is just a simple boss extrude with a shell. And that's the wing. And once this was in there, it was really exciting cuz I had I had seats, a wing, and an engine.
(12:07) And and then I could start thinking about the fuselage. And so for the fuselage this fairing was a really cool part to make. Cuz it's it's a funky shape. You know, you're going from like a rectangular profile to a circular profile with an intake. And so I have this sketch, which matches the firewall, and then this sketch, which matches the spinner on the prop.
(12:36) And then a plane for the engine intake and that profile. And then I just created a loft to connect these two profiles together as a solid and then a cut loft for the intake. And then a bunch of smoothing fillets. Then a spinner cut. And then finally a shell operation. So, you can see this like really cool looking shape only came together with a handful of features.
(13:03) Like five features in SolidWorks. But that just shows the how powerful that loft tool is. You know, for making organic looking It looks kind of looks like a smiley face, huh? So, anyway, that's the fairing. That was super fun. And then the ribs as well. So, the ribs this took the longest out of everything cuz I had this profile sketch.
(13:25) This is the like the first thing that I put in the upper assembly was what does it what does it look like from the side? Like how do I make the outside of the fuselage look streamlined and have clearance for everything like the engine and the exhaust and the wings in the right place and the canopy in the right place and have this nice sweep sweeping tail go through.
(13:45) And then you can see all these planes in here. These are just different shapes one by one by one that I wanted the airplane to take. So we got this firewall. The this is actually around the engine. This is the firewall. It's not really the firewall, but it's the carbon surrounding the firewall which is titanium.
(14:07) And then the cabin this angled seat bracket and then the tail tapering down from the shape of a seat to a circle in the back. And that was really cool how that came together. And then for the skin, I just matched the same process that I did on the wings where I took those fuselage ribs and did an offset entity to make one big solid and then a shell at the very very end.
(14:35) And you can kind of see what that looks like. But the airframe, that's probably what you guys are interested in the most if you're all off-road nerds like me. So this is the firewall and engine mount and this is like a totally custom piece. I mean, you can buy engine mounts for those Garrett engines and they all sort of look different, but the the one that I like the most looks like this.
(15:01) So you're cradling it at the bottom with some triangulated crossbeams and then you're grabbing it from the top cuz there's really not that much force just to hold everything. This really just locks it in rotationally. And the whole point of an engine mount is you you want it to be removable. So like this would have bolts going through it so that you could unbolt this part from the rest of the airframe to get the engine out.
(15:29) Or you just unbolt the engine from this and pull the engine out. But you want to be able to do both. And I just call that part firewall cuz it contains like the main firewall. But then the airframe, this was super fun. This part is incredibly heavy. So, I'm not going to try to edit it right now cuz it'll crash. But it's three big old 3D sketches.
(15:52) So this is the one 3D sketch. I mean, oh my god, look at that. Look at all those dimensions. This was this took some serious engineering nerd horsepower to get all this stuff to match cuz you'll notice I have some repeating dimensions. Like you see a bunch of 24s and a bunch of 20s cuz I wanted all these triangulated beams to be in the right place.
(16:17) And this part has to do everything. Like this is the chassis of the airplane, so to speak. It has to mount to the engine. It has to hold the spars for the wing in the front and the back. And it has to hold the tail wheel. And it has to mount the landing gear as well, which was its own thing. But you can see this X pattern here.
(16:40) So the way that I I referenced the Carbon Cub airframe for this. So let me see if I can get a good angle here so you guys can see what I'm talking about. Okay, so these ones these crossbeams on the bottom go one direction diagonally and then these crossbeams on the top go the opposite direction diagonally. And so it makes it torsionally rigid without having to overdo it on tube work.
(17:07) And this is really thin gauge, too. Let's see how thin it is. So the main Yeah, the main longerons, I believe they're called, are 063 wall thickness. And they're and 1/2 inch diameter. And then all the other little guys you see in there, these are 0 4 0 1 inch thickness. So, this is super duper thin and this whole airframe only weighs 200 lb.
(17:33) This is like the mass of a person holding the Imagine if a human being was strong enough to hold up an engine and experience 7 Gs. That's what this airframe has to do. But, you can see I got I It's totally unnecessary, but it's basically like a roll cage over the seats just to give it that off-road flare in the aerospace world.
(17:57) And that chassis was The airframe was super fun to build cuz it was this big great big heavy 3D sketch and then I just got to click away and make all the tubes appear using the SolidWorks weldment feature for the tubes. So, that's engine, wing, fuselage, airframe. We should talk about the canards cuz this is really the most interesting part of this design.
(18:23) So, what do we have here? We have conventional landing gear for a taildragger. They're rigid, meaning they're not sprung, but they kind of are and I'll explain why. But, the other cool thing about them is that they are also control surfaces. So, this is a thing that Mike Patey did on his Scrappy build where he built an airfoil onto his landing gear to give them some extra lift and I thought that was like just the coolest idea ever cuz otherwise, you know, immediately after you take off, the landing gear are just useless
(18:53) drag. That's it. That's why most planes have retractable landing gear, but if you're an ultralight air Not ultralight, but super light aerobatic plane, you don't want to deal with a heavy mechanism for retractable landing gear. So, uh I think the most robust rigid fixed landing gear that I've seen is from Kodiak.
(19:16) And that's what this is. And it took me forever to find how that Kodiak landing gear works. And it it works like this. So, Kodiak has a video on their website where like if you freeze it at the exact right time, you can see see all this stuff. It's so cool. I bet if I hunted for patents, could probably find it, but Kodiak makes the coolest bush planes.
(19:39) If you know, you know. And this is how they work. So, you have a really big tube with a little hub and spindle at the end. And then that goes into this thing, which they call a trunnion. And I've never heard that word used anywhere else other than Kodiak landing gear is a trunnion. Again, if you're an aerospace guy, and trunnion is in like page one of aerospace engineering textbooks, school me.
(20:14) I didn't go to school for this. Uh but I'm obsessed and find it fascinating. So, you can imagine let's do a screenshot and I'll I'll show you guys how this works. Okay, so, let's say you have force coming up here and force coming up here from the landing gear. There's a pivot axis on these trunnions. There's one here and one there.
(20:40) And you can kind of see Let's do this in Paint so we can change colors. These little guys, there's little pins here. And there's four of them. 1 2 3 4. And then this pivot axis connects to the airframe, the chromoly airframe. So, this is rigid and on this green line and this red line is unconstrained, meaning it's moving. So, so far, everything that we see in red is is to move.
(21:06) And everything in blue / green is fixed. So, as your force goes up on either side, these guys are allowed to swing around. They can pivot around those pins and around the tube chassis. And so, what it does is it causes the trunnions to rotate a little bit. And so, this shape from these cross braces flexes a little bit.
(21:35) So, they end up taking a shape that's sort of like this. Sort of like a shallow arc. I'm exaggerating, but like a shallow arc to flex up and down just a little bit, and that is your spring. That's your spring force. Your load-bearing spring force for the landing gear. Let me draw this at another angle just so that it's super obvious what I'm talking about. Okay.
(22:04) So, red, force goes up from the wheels. Force goes up here. These guys rotate from this direction to this direction. And the reality is these these cross beams flex a little bit as well. So, that's probably the majority of your spring force. Like this. And then, let's make a green fixed pivot point here, pivot point here, and then a rotating these pivots rotate here.
(22:31) So, as this force goes up, it causes this whole trunnion assembly to rotate in a little bit. And then now, these cross beams go from a flat shape to a slightly arced shape here. And that is just the coolest thing ever, cuz you you're relying like you're not really bending anything that's not supposed to bend. You know, rather than I think a lot of aerobatic planes have sort of a one-piece arc for this whole assembly and and aluminum it's way lighter but with this Kodiak style landing gear you could just bounce this thing off the
(23:13) runway and it would be totally fine. So, anyway, that's the landing gear. The other cool thing about the landing gear is the canards. So, let's talk about that. So, I have a hydraulic actuator here. And actually someone in my comments said that you want redundancy on everything. So, you probably want two of these hydraulic actuators in reality like one on the front and one in the back.
(23:39) That would be pretty easy to mirror this assembly over to the opposite side but this is just a push rod assembly. So, I have a clevis pin here, a heim joint here, a push rod angle bracket here and then another push rod here. You guys know I love push rod assemblies. So, here's what happens. If I grab this guy and actuate the piston back and forth the tie rod mechanisms move the canard.
(24:08) And the other cool thing is it moves them in in opposite directions. So, you can see one goes up and one goes down. So, this is functionally your aileron. So, this is your roll control for the whole airplane. And the reason I wanted to do this, this is super complicated like I could have just done a conventional aileron on the wing but I always thought it'd be cool to have an aerobatic plane where the wing lift surface is completely uninterrupted.
(24:42) Meaning there's no control surfaces on the wing. So, no matter what control inputs you're putting on the on the airframe the wing is not interrupted at all. So, it should have totally normal lift all the time regardless of what you're doing with the stick. And, you know, a canard configuration is not a new idea. There's a ton of planes that have these.
(25:04) But, I've never seen one where there's no control surfaces on the wing. This is such a huge plane that you do not need ailerons. Argument could be made that you do need flaps for landing, but those extra 330 aerobatic planes, I don't think they have flaps, and neither does the the Pitts Special, which is a really cool biplane.
(25:26) I don't think they have flaps, either. So, it's just aileron control, cuz there's so much lift. Like, do you really need flaps? So, that's how that works. And, this was kind of a a complicated mechanism to get right, cuz I have there's a thrust bearing in here. And, I'd have clearance for this heim joint and the rod end.
(25:47) This should actually be a bolt, and not a pin, so that you have Yeah, there's nothing constraining it. That should definitely be a bolt, not a pin. And, then I have this bellcrank here that just bolts to the canard assembly. So, this whole this whole canard assembly is its own thing that just gets bolted to the airplane.
(26:07) And, then another thrust bearing down here to constrain it from sliding up and down. And, then the wheel assembly. And, then this would have a wheel fairing around it, as well. But, yeah, this this mechanism was was really fun to make. I I tried at least three different designs before I landed on this. But, I think this would work.
(26:29) I really think that this hydraulic actuator and this pushrod configuration, if I duplicated it to the back for redundancy's sake, it would totally work. So, anyway, that's the canards. Let me know what you guys think about about canards. And, then the last thing that I'll talk about in this design review was the hardest part, for sure.

[NOTE - canard/landing gear aerodynamics]
I am aware that the downwash/wake coming off the canards could interfere with the airflow over the main wing, which would affect its lift and behavior. This still needs to be checked through CFD or wind tunnel/flight testing, and the canard position and landing gear angle should be adjusted accordingly based on those results. The focus of this design so far was mainly the mechanical side (actuation, structure, and mechanisms), not the aerodynamic optimization.

(26:50) So, let's isolate this and the airframe. I spent multiple nights staying up late trying to figure out how in the world this would work. And I still for the life of me can't figure out how they ever did this with cables to have a V-tail. This is a V-tail. Bunch of planes have done this. There's a I think there's a Piper Cherokee that has a V-tail.
(27:14) Super cool. Super duper cool. But, unlike the canards, where they just rotate opposite directions, this one has to be able to do both cuz this controls it controls pitch and yaw. So, you have to be able to get these to rotate the same way and opposite directions on command. And I figured out how to do it with two different hydraulic actuator types.
(27:40) So, let's let's do this. Okay. So, and this is also not a new thing. There's a bunch of fighter jets that have these that have V-tails. And cuz you have to when you're supersonic, you have to just like push the air out of the way or you can't really use there's no lift anymore once you're supersonic. So, so here's what I did.
(27:59) So, for pitch control, I have a regular hydraulic actuator. And as this piston moves in and out, the these guys, the V-tail, they move up and down together. So, if you wanted to pitch up, you go like this and pushes the tail down. If you wanted to pitch down, you go like this and it pushes the tail up. And here's what's interesting.
(28:25) This hydraulic actuator is pushing this whole assembly. So, that includes all this stuff and all those push rods. So, with the same bell crank, Heim joint, thrust bearing, and some spars. Just regular spars like the other one, carbon spars. Okay. So, now you got that. Now, let's say you want yaw control.
(28:50) So, how do you get yaw? How do you get the plane to rotate about the vertical axis without a proper rudder? Well, you have to get these guys to move opposite directions. So, I have this thing. This is another bellcrank, and it pushes the push rods opposite directions about a central pivot point, which is this rotary hydraulic pump.
(29:15) So, I have a normal piston-driven hydraulic actuator, and then this rotary hydraulic pump, which this is I'm pretty sure there's a like a rack and pinion mechanism inside of here, most likely. But, this rotates around a center axis, and so, if you go like this, the air's pushing on this side of the tail, and the air's pushing on this side of the tail, and it's going to rotate the whole plane to yaw that way.
(29:49) And then same thing in the opposite direction, like that. So, again, fly-by-wire and hydraulics was the only way that I could figure out how to make this work. I've no idea what type of crazy pulley mechanisms you would have to design to get all of this to be controlled by one stick, especially two sticks if it's a two-seater, but that just goes to show that aerospace engineers are super geniuses for making all this stuff work.
(30:20) But, yeah, this is my attempt at an unconventional control surface configuration on a very conventional-looking plane. It's just a regular old two-seat taildragger with a puller prop, but yeah, I just I love all these mechanisms. I love moving this stuff around. It's so cool. You know, it's it's really fun to conceptualize how all this stuff works, how all this stuff would work, and then figure out how to get it to move and and actuate in SolidWorks without breaking or binding.
(30:52) And man, the clearances on here were so tight. Like, when this thing is maxed out, it like almost hits everything, but there's like just enough room. Took me a bunch of iterations to get all that clearance to be right. But yeah, that's the that's the aerobatic biplane. I hope you guys enjoy. Um let me know if I missed anything critical uh in aerospace design on this.
(31:20) If you come from that world, I'm super interested. Um I'm not an aerospace engineer. I'm not even a real mechanical engineer, to be honest with you. I am an optical engineer, which is lenses and lasers. I just love playing around in SolidWorks, and this is what the inside of my brain looks like. So, thanks for listening in.
(31:41) We'll be on to the next design very soon.
